[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Thoughts Podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe, we're back in Jackson Hole.
>> Jackson Hole. I love it here. I love it.
>> It's beautiful. It's beautiful. And uh
not only do we get a chance to enjoy the
gorgeous scenery, we get a chance to
talk economic policy.
>> There's so much going on right now to
say the least. We don't need to
recapitulate. Everyone knows what's
going on right now. There's so much
stuff whether we're talking about macro
situation, whether we're talking about
whatever.
>> I love how you say there's no need to
recapitulate and then you immediately do
it.
>> But you know, there's just so much going
on.
>> I think you're hitting on like a couple
things, which is there are these
different themes floating through the
conference. So obviously you have
uncertainty over what tariffs actually
do to the economy. Like what type of
shock are they? Do they destroy demand
and therefore maybe cause deflation or
do they lead to companies passing on
those costs and cause inflation? There's
central bank independence which everyone
wants to talk about and there's
obviously the direction of short-term
interest rates
>> and then of course the formal and then
of course the formal theme of the
conference about labor markets and all
this stuff. So yes, many different
things going on.
>> All right. Well, I am very pleased to
say that there is in fact one paper that
ties basically all these themes
together. So, we have the author here
and really the perfect guest to talk
>> someone we've wanted to talk to for a
long time.
>> Absolutely. We're going to be speaking
with Emmy Nakamura, a professor at
Berkeley and the author of a paper being
presented at Jackson Hole called Beyond
the Taylor Rule. So, Emmy, thank you so
much for coming on all thoughts.
>> It's great to be here.
>> Let's just start. What is the Taylor
rule? before we can go beyond it.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> Well, in 1993, John Taylor wrote a paper
in which he showed that the behavior of
the Federal Reserve could be described
by this remarkably simple rule as a
function of inflation and what people
call the output gap, which is sort of a
measure of how overheated the economy
is. And this was very surprising to
people because people typically think of
what the Federal Reserve and other
central banks do as incredibly
complicated. And so the surprise was
that you could actually describe it by
something very simple. And since that
time when John Taylor wrote his original
paper in 1993, the Taylor rule has
achieved more or less mythical status
within economics and the policym world.
The original paper was mostly
descriptive. Like I said, it was
pointing out that the behavior of the
Fed, which seemed complicated, could
actually be described by something
really simple. But since then, it's
really become a guide for prescriptive
monetary policy. And when central banks
deviate from the Taylor rule, they're
often asked to explain why uh this was a
major theme in the postcoid inflation
for example.
>> So on that note, could I ask why the
Taylor rule specifically and talk to us
maybe about the process of how these
papers come into being ahead of Jackson
Hole?
>> Why we wrote about the Taylor rule?
Well, it as I said, the Taylor rule has
achieved this incredibly dominant status
within not only the academic literature
on monetary policy, but also within the
policy community. And yet, when I teach
students, one of the things that's
somewhat uncomfortable is that the
Taylor rule doesn't fit all that well
over the past 20 years. So, it fit
pretty well during the Greenspan period
and all the way until about 2008 in the
United States, but it hasn't fit very
well since then. First of all, there was
the zero lower bound period when
interest rates were just at zero. But it
also didn't predict very well either the
timing or the magnitude of the liftoff
from zero interest rates. So given that
20 years is starting to be a long time,
uh the question is should we still view
this as the benchmark for describing
monetary policy? And then there's this
second question about how to think about
good monetary policy. So when John
Taylor wrote his original paper, you
know, it was mostly descriptive paper,
but he did point out that this was a
time period. The time period he said was
actually only 6 years. It was from 1987
to 1992. But he pointed out that this
was a time period a lot of people
thought of as representing good monetary
policy. So while the paper was mostly
descriptive, he did say, you know, well,
maybe this is a guide to good monetary
policy, too. And that's a theme that a
lot of people have picked up on since
then. And and we thought it was
important to sort of reinvestigate that
theme. But this is funny, right? Like
because there is this tension of whether
it's a descriptive or prescriptive
thing. And I've heard for years people
on TV, it's like, "Oh, the Taylor rule
says it should be a lot higher or the
Taylor roll says it should be lower,
whatever."
>> But we just heard it from Jeff Schmidt
at the Kansas Fed, right?
>> And yet this is all based on basically a
sort of backing out description of five
years of monetary policy that six year.
Okay. Sorry. Six years. Maybe not quite.
So can you talk a little bit more about
though this I don't know if it's a
debate or like how people think about
prescriptive versus descriptive within
this role. So the tension that you're
describing is exactly what motivated us
to write this paper because it's
interesting how you know a framework
like this which is so simple and so
powerful in terms of describing monetary
policy and does say some things that are
very true about what monetary policy
should do in terms of leaning against
inflation, leaning against an
overhitting overheating economy can um
end up becoming maybe more than even the
author intended as a prescriptive rule.
And one of the things that we want to
remind people of is the historical
context for when John Taylor's paper was
written. So it was written in 1993. This
was a period when the Fed was coming off
some very difficult years for monetary
policy. So the 1970s and 1980s were very
difficult years for monetary policy.
Inflation had been very high in the late
1970s and early 1980s. The Fed's
reputation
was, to say the least, limited as an
inflation fighter. inflation
expectations were not nearly as anchored
as uh they are today. So it was a very
different time and I think some of the
context for John Taylor's paper is
saying that when you have those kinds of
reputational challenges sometimes you
kind of need to tie yourself to a mass
and say we are not going by a
mathematical rule.
>> Exactly. Because the 1970s are also one
of the time periods in history which is
best known for political pressure on the
Fed. And so in the context of that kind
of political pressure, one of the things
you want to think about doing is giving
people a very simple observable metric
for how you adjust interest rates. But
then of course by you know several
decades later the Fed's reputation had
changed pretty dramatically. We had seen
decades of low and stable inflation and
you know the Fed and other central banks
around the world had really uh developed
a very strong inflation fighting
reputation. And so then the question
arises is the same kind of tying your
hands approach appropriate even in the
context of you know shocks like what we
saw after co and so this is the sense in
which I think you know this is a time at
which we we want to ask these questions.
It reminds me very much of the som rule
and the arguments there that if you find
like a specific number the idea is that
you use a sort of simple formula and
then you immediately jump into action.
So on that note, one of the key things
about the Taylor rule is that it
suggests rates need to rise by more than
one for one with inflation to properly
offset inflation. Like you have to go in
very very strong. But you found in your
paper that that's not always the case.
Exactly. So even beyond the idea that
you want to raise interest rates more
than one for one. So it's it's the
coefficient is 1.5 in the Taylor rule,
but there's the idea even beyond that of
the Taylor principle, which is exactly
what you described that you want to not
only raise interest rates, nominal
interest rates with inflation, but you
want to raise real interest rates. And
if you want to raise real interest
rates, then you have to raise nominal
interest rates more than one for one.
Exactly what you said. And so that's
kind of a core idea and it's one of the
main reasons why the gap between the
tailor rule prescription and what
central banks actually did during the co
inflation was so large. And actually for
the United States this gap was about was
over 10 percentage points. So we are
talking about a very large gap. Uh and
the co inflation saw the largest gap in
history.
>> So why does that not actually happen
always in in monetary theory? Well the
reason is because there are different
sources of inflation. So the motivation
for leaning hard against inflation um
that is probably pretty intuitive to
most people is uh demand driven
inflation. So when inflation is coming
from an overheating economy, then
there's this notion in monetary
economics that you can satisfy all
objectives of both kind of calming down
the economy but also keeping inflation
in check by raising interest rates
pretty aggressively. And actually
optimal monetary policy theory implies
you might even be want to be more
aggressive than the tailor rule. But in
contrast, when you have shocks to
inflation that don't come directly from
an overheating economy, but also come
from um you know other sources of
increases in costs, you know, so the
supply shocks that people talked about
during the co inflation period, then
these same models can imply very
different predictions. Um they can imply
that you don't want to raise interest
rates nearly so much in response to
inflation associated with these kinds of
shocks. So in our paper what we do is we
use a very standard monetary model and
we simulate data from this model where
we assume that the monetary policy is
actually exactly optimal. So the central
bank is really doing the right thing and
then we run regressions you know where
we try to estimate what would what we
get for the tailor rule in this context
and then the interesting observation is
that you find that actually a lot of
times the coefficient on inflation is is
is less than one. Um sometimes it's
close to zero sometimes it's even
negative. So really a lot of things can
happen when you deviate only from this
uh view of inflation is coming from an
overheating economy.
[Music]
>> Did the Fed do a good job?
>> The paper reads like vindication.
>> Yeah. like cuz I I think in 2025 there's
still plenty of fights about this
question. What's your take?
>> I think in so we don't know what's going
to happen
going forward but I think in in the long
span of history if you look at what
happened over the past 5 years I think
this is going to look like a soft
landing
>> and that is typically exactly what the
Federal Reserve is trying to achieve. So
I mean obviously the Fed appropriately
and and private sector forecasters took
a lot of flack for saying that inflation
was going to be very transitory when
inflation was significantly more
persistent. That said, inflation did
come down very quickly and uh there
hasn't been a recession and that is
remarkable and not only has there not
been a recession and not only did
inflation come down very quickly, but
longerterm inflation expectations really
did not become unhinged despite this
historic increase in inflation. We, you
know, haven't seen large increases in
longerterm bond yields. So this is all
pretty remarkable and I would think that
if if things go well over the next five
years that in the longer span of history
this is going to look like a big
success. So this is where central bank
independence and credibility actually
comes into play when it comes to those
longerterm inflation expectations. How
did you actually measure credibility in
this paper? Because you don't look just
at the Fed, you look at a bunch of other
central banks,
>> right? So when we look at other central
banks um one of the things we point out
is that there was a huge amount of
variation in terms of how different
central banks reacted to the co
inflation. So we've been talking about
the United States and similarly
countries like Japan, the UK, the Euro
area. These countries all raised
interest rates very gradually and by
very moderate amounts relative to the
size of the inflation increases they
were facing. And so they all took a lot
of flak for raising interest rates too
slowly, for behind the curve, for not
raising interest rates enough. And these
are the countries we refer to in our
paper as uh late risers um because they
were a little late to the game, right?
But there were other countries in the
world we refer to as early risers who
raised interest rates a lot more
aggressively and a lot earlier. And the
interesting observation, you might have
thought that these countries would have
suffered from the fact the late riser
countries would have suffered from the
fact that they were late to the game in
raising interest rates with having
higher inflation than the early risers
who responded very aggressively. And in
fact, we find the opposite. So the early
risers did respond very aggressively to
the co inflation, but they actually saw
inflation rise by a lot more during this
episode. So then we ask the question,
well, what could explain that? That
seems sort of backwards. You know, you
have these countries that seem to have
responded very aggressively with
interest rates and yet they saw the the
larger and more persistent inflationary
surges. But then what we see is that
those same countries are countries that
have u much more checkered inflation
histories. So you asked about
reputation. Well, a very simple way to
ask about the reputation of a central
bank for controlling inflation is just
to look at average inflation in in the
recent decades. And so we look at
average inflation over the previous
three decades and we see that the early
riser countries the ones that you know
probably felt they had to respond very
aggressively to the co inflation also
had much more checkered uh inflation
histories. had much higher average
inflation over the past three decades
previous to co. And so I think a natural
interpretation of these facts is that
for these countries they did not feel
that they had the inflation fighting
credibility of the central banks in the
United States or in Japan or in the Euro
area. They did not feel that they had
the kind of strongly anchored inflation
expectations that these countries could
benefit from. And so for these countries
it really probably was not an option to
think that they could look through you
know the inflation and yet keep
inflation expectations anchored and but
but yet that is actually what happened
in in the United States and several
other of these late riser countries.
>> So I find this to be really fascinating
and I want to get to the question of
like whether the developed market or the
US has like ground down its stock of
credibility over the last 5 years but I
wanted on this question of the early
risers.
I get what you're saying, but it's still
not intuitive to me that the countries
or the central banks with a sort of
mediocre history of controlling
inflation this time around were really
on the ball in unison. I mean, I would
think that if a central bank has a
history of missing its inflation target
or letting inflation rise that at least
some of them would have done it again.
They would have like come in late
because that's what they do
institutionally. like how consistent is
this process around the world whereby
the countries that have a bad track
record were early risers this time
around
>> right so we're not including every
country so there are some countries uh
which are outliers in terms of their um
in in terms of their response in terms
of their inflation but I think one of
the things you have to recognize is that
in the world as a whole there has been
quite a remarkable sort of triumph of
central banks over inflation so back in
the 1970s and 1980s almost every country
was like what we see in the early risers
today. So none of these countries had
really strong credentials as inflation
fighters. And more recently um there are
a number of these countries which are
kind of moving in the direction of
having much stronger inflation fighting
credentials but at the same time you
know these are countries where it's a
relatively fresh history. You know so
you look at some of these countries
where they had pretty high inflation in
the past
>> and you know and they're just sort of
starting to be able to get over it. And
then the question is, do you think that
the public will be willing to watch you
go through a period of say 10% inflation
and say, "Oh, we're sure you're going to
get it back to to 2%." Or do you think,
you know, there's going to be a real
question of whether you're going to be
able to achieve that?
>> Okay. So if on the other hand you do
have good credibility, you do have a
good history of inflation fighting, then
you can kind of spend that social
capital I guess and avoid having to
raise interest rates by as much as you
know maybe another central bank that
doesn't have that credibility. Walk us
through what exactly are the benefits of
not having to do that
>> of not having to uh raise rates early.
>> Absolutely. Well, you get closer to to
optimal monetary policy. So in the
models you know the basic idea is for
example if you have one of these cost
push shocks where there's a shock that
is going directly to inflation because
of increases in costs or bottlenecks of
various types or or you have a shock
like during COVID to people's demand for
goods versus services. If you raise the
interest rate dramatically like the
tailor rule might have predicted you
raise the interest rate to 10%. So
what's going to have to happen to get
inflation down to zero in the short run?
Well maybe you're going to have to have
a big recession. You're gonna have to
have uh one part of the economy
completely collapse. You know,
>> Trump will tweet at you more or post on
truth social more
>> probably. You're gonna have to have
really uh negative inflation in some
sectors of the economy and you're going
to have to be have a big recession and
potentially, you know, the other issue
is that there's a lot of evidence
suggesting that monetary policy has
pretty delayed effects. So another
concern and as I said you know in this
episode professional forecasters and the
Fed both thought that the inflation
would be more transitory than it
actually was. But another concern is if
you think that the uh shocks that are
causing the inflation are sort of going
to dissipate on their own and you think
the monetary policy has going to take
some time to have an effect then one of
the concerns is that by the time the
monetary policy actually has a large
effect then you know some of these
shocks are going to dissipate. And then
I guess the third thing I I would
mention is that in theory the central
bank actually wants to use a combination
not only of current interest rate
movements but also of forward guidance.
So this is one of the big innovations in
monetary policy over recent decades. We
think about forward guidance a lot in
the context of the zero lower bound when
you can't do anything with you know Fed
funds rate and so it's all about forward
guidance but actually forward guidance
is a much much more general phenomenon.
It's really whenever the central bank is
calling it shots about what it's going
to do with interest rates even over the
next year. So this was hugely important
during the uh co inflationary surge
because the Fed started talking about
raising interest rates and longer term
bond yields started rising pretty
rapidly in late 2021 substantially
before the Fed funds rate actually
started to rise rapidly. And in in the
in the theory, a central bank that has
that power, it has the ability to affect
the economy, not just through what it
does with the Fed funds rate, but also
through its words and the impact on the
bond market through that channel will
actually want to use both. And so that's
another advantage of not being bound by
these kinds of constraints.
>> This strikes me as an incredibly
important point, which is that you can
tighten monetary policy by talking about
stuff. So that just by looking at that
overnight rate that the rule might
anticipate etc does not necessarily
capture the stance of monetary at that
time if you're already indicated and
you're pulling forward those rate hikes.
So do we have less credibility today you
know so okay maybe the Fed did a good
job in this time. Nonetheless there was
this very big inflationary episode etc.
So after years of very cool inflation
finally we got a big one going forward.
Does that mean the next time around if
there is another inflationary shock for
whatever reason that the Fed might be
impelled to be more of an early riser
than it felt in this cycle?
>> I would think almost definitely yes.
Remember that going into the co
inflation, you know, regular people
hadn't seen significant amounts of
inflation for years. It just wasn't
really part of the mindset of anyone. um
you know when you saw for example unions
in wage negotiations or other context
things where inflation should have been
relevant it was sort of striking that it
just wasn't on anyone's mind and it even
took a while after the inflation started
for people to even think about this
because it had become so much of a
non-issue for so many years that it was
just not part of the mental frame of
Americans I see this very much when I
teach students because for American
students typically I have to do a lot of
work to just explain the difference for
example between a nominal interest rate
and a real interest rate.
>> I did not earn interest on my bank
account for most of my adult life. So I
>> Exactly. But in contrast for Latin
American students they get it
immediately because it's just part of
how they grew up right and I think that
that distinction has probably blurred at
least a little bit right because now
people have gone through a few years
where it mattered to pay a little bit of
attention to inflation. And so my guess
is that if we start to see inflation
again, it's going to be, you know, a
much more rapid transition to where
people will start to ask whether this is
going to uh last longer, whether now
that we've seen, you know, two
inflationary episodes in the recent
past, whether this is sort of the new
normal. You know, I think it's important
not to forget how um hard one uh those
expectations of low inflation were for
the Federal Reserve and many other
countries. you know, it's certainly
something that can dissipate.
>> So, because we're dealing with the
Taylor rule, which basically, you know,
suggests or describes either way what
the central bank should do with interest
rates in response to inflation and
changes in the output gap. We're talking
basically about like the impact of
shocks to that output gap.
There's a nuance here because like
shocks can be different and have
different effects on the output gap.
What type of shock would tariffs be? I
know this isn't the subject of your
paper, but you know your gut instinct.
How would you describe tariffs in terms
of that economic shock and the impact on
output? So, there have been a number of
recent academic papers on this. It's not
the focus of our paper, but I think that
the overall message of those papers is
that you do want to look through sort of
the initial impact of the tariffs, but
you don't want to look through sort of
second round effects. So to the extent
that you start to see an effect in terms
of longer run inflation expectations
becoming unhinged and so on, that's the
part of the inflation that the central
bank would want to be responding
aggressively to.
[Music]
I have another question that may be
outside the scope of this specific paper
but no
>> it has a lot of relevance to today.
>> There's a lot when you think about
around the world some central banks have
more credibility than some others. Is it
that the good central banks just had
like smarter better economists do
advising them better on policy than the
other ones? Or does it have more to do
with the political conditions that allow
a central bank to operate separately
from to essentially operate with
independent agency and is that more of a
thing that originates in the political
sphere of those countries?
>> I think clearly the politics is very
important. I guess it would point to two
things. One is those difficult decades
of the 1970s and 1980s which occurred in
many countries around the world and
where people in these countries realized
uh how much they hated inflation. We got
a little bit of a taste of this uh
during the COVID inflation. Inflation
just is incredibly unpopular and it was
for this reason that it was possible in
the United States to appoint Paul Vulkar
as chairman of the Fed even though it
was known before he was appointed what
he was going to do that he was going to
raise interest rates aggressively that
this was going to be painful. uh and so
that's a remarkable thing that it was
actually possible to make this
appointment but of course similar things
actually happened in other countries as
well there were similar appointments of
aggressive you know central bankers that
controlled inflation so I think part of
this did come out of you know sort of a
public reaction to inflation but at the
same time it didn't happen everywhere
just like you said and could only happen
in the context of political protection
for the central bank uh central bank
independence And perhaps in some ways
it's just sort of a remarkable thing
that it ever did happen uh that we've
seen this long period of of low
inflation in many of these countries. I
suddenly realized I've heard all over
over the years at various times where
we're where deviations from the Taylor
rule whether it was the zero lower bound
era where we couldn't lower them or more
recently how far were they off in the
70s when inflation was going crazy is
there is there a good measure of like no
clearly they should have been higher
this like what does the Taylor rule say
about that
>> the 1970 is very interesting because one
of the things we point out in our paper
is that the the predictions and the
prescriptions of the tailor rule are of
course only as good as the inputs you
put into them. And one of the things
that some of the academic literature's
pointed out is that you don't
necessarily want to use the data that we
have today on something like the output
gap because views about the output gap
that is you know how overheating is the
economy have changed over time and in
particular in the 1970s the Federal
Reserve was pretty optimistic about the
potential output of the US economy and
for that reason its judgment about the
output gap was pretty negative and this
helps to explain through the lens of the
Taylor rule, why they had pretty
doubbish monetary policy in the 1970s.
So actually, if you take the real-time
data on what the Fed said it thought the
output gap was at the time along with um
inflation, then you get more or less
what they did. And what happened in
terms of, you know, why many people
think that the policy was too deficient
in the 1970s has a lot to do whether you
think those measures of the output gap
were reasonable. And you know the
current estimates according to the Fed
you know are much less sort of doubbish
than they than they were at the time.
But it highlights the fact that even
when you want to create a rule which is
sort of very technocratic and doesn't
give you any wiggle room that's not
entirely true because something like the
output gap is not something that you can
just read off a statistic like
inflation. actually you can um and so as
a consequence you know it really matters
what judgment you take about where you
are relative to the economy's potential
>> you can never escape human you never
quite escape human judgment
>> unfortunately I remember that the output
gap debate was a big thing after 2008 as
well
>> okay just going back to the idea of this
technocratic rule whether it's
prescriptive or descriptive I know
people have different opinions on that
but supposedly one of the benefits of it
being possibly prescriptive was that you
have a central bank that like does a
very expected thing like you know what
the reaction function is and you know
what they're going to do in response to
inflation.
How does that play into the credibility
aspect? Because on the other hand, you
know, more credible central banks, they
can kind of go off and do their own
thing, go beyond the Taylor rule as you
put it in the paper. But on the other
hand, does that unexpected behavior
perhaps have an impact on their own
credibility even if it's successful in
the short term?
>> Absolutely. I mean, I I think that the
ta like that technocratic rules like the
Taylor rule, they absolutely have a
place in the cannon of monetary policy.
And you know perhaps one could even
argue that they should be the default in
response to many kinds of inflationary
episodes because there are many kinds of
inflationary episodes like um those
associated with excessive demand you
know an overheating economy and also you
even worse just sort of self-fulfilling
worries about inflation that spiral off
into really serious inflationary
episodes. So, in response to all of
those kinds of episodes, you know, it it
may may be a very good idea for the for
people to be able to expect that the
central bank is going to respond
aggressively along the lines of
something like the Taylor rule. And
there's a sense in which you might want
to think about going beyond the Taylor
rule as something that you don't do all
the time, but that you recognize has to
happen some of the time when you have a
strong sense uh that a different kind of
shock is hitting the economy. And in
some of those episodes, you you might
actually want to very explicitly use
forward guidance. So, for example,
during the Great Recession, that was a
period when there was, you know, some of
the most explicit usage of forward
guidance to talk about the timing of how
long the Fed was going to keep interest
rates at zero. And that was a very
powerful tool in terms of affecting
longerterm interest rates. It's very
easy to see that in the data. And that's
the kind of thing where you know it's
not about going away from reputation
which it's it's true that core idea is
that you want markets to absolutely be
confident that the central bank is going
to respond aggressively
>> to any sense of deankering of inflation
expectations and that is very important.
But at times you may want to to use
forward guidance in other ways and the
response of the Fed to the Great
Recession is an example of that.
>> I just have one last question and it's
kind of selfish. So you're talking
about, you know, different sources of
inflation, whether it's excess demand or
whether it's supply. You know, Tracy and
I did like a ton of podcast episodes in
2021, 2022 about supply chains. We
talked about the ports and all this
stuff that you know, but someone could
say you guys were missing the forest for
the trees. The stress at the ports
wasn't about supply chains. It was
because there was too much demand. The
stress at the X factory wasn't because
of some supply chain or missing part.
There was just too much demand. You guys
were just disguising demand problems by
focusing on choke points that are
inevitably going to emerge when booming
demand. I still think about this. I'm
like, "Oh, should we have focus some?"
You know, I'm like, but you have
described a lot of this inflation and
part of the reason for the immaculate
disinflation is because a lot of it was
supply defense. You know, I'm looking
for a defense of all this focus that we
did on the supply side.
>> So, I think you're you're right that
there's kind of a false dichotomy
between talking about demand shocks and
things like supply constraints, um, you
know, like the ports and the Suez Canal
and so on because you're right that if
you have too much demand, then at some
point, you know, these supply chains get
clogged. And so it's it's it's
absolutely right that those kinds of
supply constraints are not quite the
same as supply shocks, right? But there
are other things which are just directly
shocks.
>> The the war in Ukraine was a shock.
>> Exactly. And CO for example generated
all sorts of sort of negative
productivity throughout the economy that
just made things more expensive to
produce in a variety of ways. So these
are some of the things that I think are
genuinely basically negative
productivity shocks which were sort of
hard to find examples of previous to but
easy to find examples of during CO.
>> How good are policy makers at
identifying types of shocks in real
time? That is a very important question
and you know I think my discussion of
the 1970s and the fact that you know
views have changed over time about the
output gap during that period and also
during the the co inflation you know
views have changed shows that this is by
no means perfect but at the same time I
think there are times when there's a
strong sense that you know the co
inflation for example wasn't just about
you know self-fulfilling inflation
expectations or something like this and
so that's where I want to emphasize this
idea that there's a difference between
saying that we can always identify the
shocks with confidence which clearly we
cannot and saying that we can never
identify any shocks you know to the
extent that we need to tie ourselves all
the time to a mechanical rule which you
know may deviate from from what theory
really says is optimal monetary policy
but again you know I think crucial ideas
is all of this has to take place against
a background where there's sort of
confidence in the central bank's
commitment to longer run inflation
stability. All right, Emmy Nakamura,
thank you so much. This was a real treat
for us. I kind of want to go to Berkeley
now.
>> Yeah, I know. It's I do, too. That was
amazing. Thank you so much. That was
fantastic.
>> Thank you. That was great.
[Music]
Joe, that was fantastic. I really
enjoyed that conversation. And Emmy has
a remarkable way of explaining like some
complicated concepts very si simply and
in a real understandable way cuz if you
flip through her paper there's a lot of
formulas and things like that. So it
looks complicated but she explained it
very clearly
>> incredibly clearly. I had the same
thought I was like oh man it would be so
nice to just be like a student and like
learn you know get to being a student
sounds very fun. Um but um but
incredibly clear and you know we're
she's uh you know one of the foremost
inflation experts in sort of academia
and so to hear her sort of like sort of
summation of how she thinks about the
last 5 years and the lessons learned
from it was like a real treat.
>> Yeah. And obviously there are a couple
takeaways there. So one, it is
incredibly hard for policy or often
incredibly hard for policy makers to
identify shocks, you know, at the moment
that they're happening, but sometimes
they can like in co and I guess the
second takeaway is the importance of
credibility, right? And if you if you
manage to successfully control inflation
for years and years and decades or
whatever, you build up that social
capital which then allows you to be
somewhat more flexible when you have
another crisis.
>> Yeah, I I thought that was really
interesting. Um, also there are a couple
other things that struck me. First of
all, until reading this paper, and this
is just my fault because I could look
this up at any time. I had not realized
that the Taylor rule was built up six
years of data. There's like okay this is
the rule that describes when a central
bank is doing a good job
>> monetary policy basically
>> this is the rule that sort of describes
what a well functioning central bank
looks like is basically six years uh you
know that's interesting that's
interesting to me too and second of all
this idea that even though it does look
like a hard rule that you can't escape
the fact that you have to judge the
output gap and there were very big
debates about the size of the output gap
after 2008 and 2009 very sharp
disagreements about the capacity or what
full employment looked like. So even
that doesn't fully solve you. Even if
you do tie yourself to the lash of a
hard rule or lash yourself to the mast
of a hard rule, the tough problem still.
>> Yeah, it's it's tough. All right, shall
we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the
OddLots podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Jill Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. If you want to read
Emy's paper, go check out the Kansas
City Feds website. Follow our producers
Kerman Rodriguez at Kerman Arman
Dashelbennet at Dashbot and Kale Brooks
at Kalebrooks. For more OddLots content,
go to bloomberg.com/odlotss
where we have a daily newsletter and all
of our episodes. And you can chat about
all of these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlotss.
And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we go to Jackson Hole to interview
prominent economists, then please leave
us a positive review on your favorite
podcast platform. And remember, if you
are a Bloomberg subscriber, you can
listen to all of our episodes absolutely
adree. All you need to do is find the
Bloomberg channel on Apple Podcast and
follow the instructions there. Thanks
for listening.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.